# Iterative Methods for Solving Linear Systems
Iterative methods such as Jacobi, Gauss-Seidel, and Successive Over-Relaxation (SOR) are fundamental tools in solving large systems of linear equations across various scientific fields. Their use of matrix multiplication instead of matrix inverse makes them ideal for solving large systems quickly. Our research explores the factors of each method that define their respective strengths, limitations, and convergence behaviors to understand how these methods address drawbacks encountered when performing matrix operations by hand, as well as how they can be used in real world applications. After implementing each method by hand to understand how the algorithms work, we developed a Python program that assesses a user-given matrix based on each method’s specific convergence criteria. The program compares the spectral radii of all three methods and chooses to execute whichever will yield the fastest convergence rate. Our research revealed the importance of mathematical modeling and understanding specific properties of the coefficient matrix. We observed that Gauss-Seidel is usually the most efficient method because it is faster than Jacobi and doesn't have as strict requirements as SOR. We applied the knowledge we gained to a traffic flow model of I-485. After creating a program that generates the matrix for this model, we were able to iteratively approximate the flow of cars through neighboring exits using data from the N.C. Department of Transportation. This information shows which areas are the most congested and can be used to inform future infrastructure development.
